So when we navigate from another page to
the blog page, it needs to get the JSON,
this address before it can
render this markup here.
And if it was doing that inside an unmount
handler like we were doing earlier,
then what we'd see is a flash of missing
content before that stuff loaded.
What we really want is when we
navigate from home to blog,
is for that content to get loaded
before the navigation occurs.
And in Sapper,
we can do that by exporting a function
called preload from the component.
So this index.svelte file here
has a script context=module
like we saw with that example earlier
with a multiple audio element.
And it's returning a promise
that fetches the blog.json file,
turns it into JSON, and then passes
that data to the component as a prop.
So it's able to load the data
before the component gets rendered,
meaning that you get this
seamless client side navigation.
And that preload function serves another
purpose, which is that if you have
the right attribute applied to any anchor
tags that link to a particular component,
then it's able to preload data
before you've even begun navigation.
So in our nav component over here,
On the link that takes us to the blog
page, we have this thing rel = prefetch.
That is a signal to Sapper that if the
user looks like they're about to click on
the blog link either because they've
tapped the link but haven't yet
removed their finger or because their
mouse has hovered over the link.
Then it should go ahead and
prefetch the data that it's about to
need in order to do that navigation.
So that makes navigation nice and
fast and seamless.
And we can see that in action if
we open dev tools and move away
from blog and refresh the page, and then
look at the requests that are coming in.
It's gonna clear that so
that we don't see it.
And now if I hover over
the blog link in the nav,
you'll see it fetched the blog.JSON
before I actually clicked on it.
And so now when I click,
that data is already loaded and
it can render instantly.
In the case of pages with dynamic
parameters like slug.svelte,
the preload function received
a set of parameters that
correspond to the parts of
the file name that are dynamic.
So in our case,
params.slug corresponds to the part
of the URL within the square brackets.
So for example,
if we navigate to /blog/what-is-sapper,
params.slug will be
equal to what-is-sapper.
So inside our preload function,
we can fetch blog/what-is-sapper.json and
that in turn gets passed
to this JSON file.
Which means that we can then find our
data whether it's from our database or
by looking on disk.
In this case, we're just going through
the array and finding the piece
of hard coded data inside this post
whether it correspond to that slug,
and then we can just return that
object from the get handler.
And then we can send it back to the
preload function where upon it gets turned
into a post that gets passed to the prop,
which is then used to render the page.
So this preload function
runs on the server and
then it runs on the client when
you do client side navigation.
So if the first page that you visit when
you come to this site is what-is-sapper,
then it will run on the server and
generate this HTML and
serve that back to you.
But if you're navigating from
home to blog and enter here,
then instead of running on the server, the
preload function will run in the client.
So this needs to be
what we call universal,
it can run in both environments.
Now we don't actually need to
run a node server to serve
this site because it's never gonna change.
Until we redeploy it
with some new content,
every request we're giving URL is
gonna return the exact same content.
So instead of running on node server,
what we want to do is export this
site as a series of static files.
And we can do that in Sapper by shutting
down our development server and
doing mpm run export, which is gonna
build the site in production mode and
then it's gonna crawl the site.
And it's gonna generate files from any
links that it finds as it's crawling
from index.html outwards.
And we see at the bottom here it said npx
serve __sapper__/export to run the app,
we can look at what's
inside that directory.
And it's just a bunch of static
files that you would use with
GitHub Pages or Netlify or
any static hosting service.
So let's do what it says,
npx serve __sapper__/export.
It's installing serve then it has made
that site available on localhost 5000.
And there we go.
So even though it's a static site with
full server rendering, we still get
the interactivity in the client side
navigation that gives us this nice,
slick reload free experience.
And we can take those files and we can
put them pretty much anywhere we like.
We've already seen a couple
of sites like this today,
the Svelte workshop site
is a similar sort of thing.
This is a statically exported site.
And the Cameo Explorer site
that we were looking at,
this is also a statically exported site.
Even though we've got, All of
the interactivity that you'd expect to
have in a JavaScript driven application,
it's all just basically static file.
There's no server anywhere in site.
And in fact sapper.svelte.dev,
which is a documentation site for
Sapper is itself a statically
exported Sapper site.